README.md, before:

# Formula 1 Data Analysis
Analysis of Formula 1 ```.json``` files based on the very generous data files from [F1DB](https://github.com/f1db/f1db) for the vast majority of the analysis. F1DB did not have race control messages which include Safety Cars and flags. For that data, I used [FastF1](https://docs.fastf1.dev/). Full data analysis is available through the [Formula 1 Analysis - Streamlit app](https://f1analysis-app.streamlit.app/).

## File organization
There are two python files involved in this app: ```raceAnalysis.py``` and ```f1-generate-analysis.py```, though there are other python files which generate content. The Race Analysis file is what runs the Streamlit code and displays the data, filters, charts, etc. Before that file is run, you need to run the Generate Analysis page. This creates a bunch of dataframes, and it creates several .csv files for easier retrievel during the Streamlit display. This is done so fewer calculations are required in the Streamlit app which should improve performance. However, it does require that you run the ```f1-generate-analysis.py``` before you run the Steamlit.

The CSV files and any associated .json files are included in the ```data_files``` directory. The ```.json``` files come from [F1DB](https://github.com/f1db/f1db). The following files are generated and then copied into the ```data_files``` directory:

1. ```f1WeatherData_Grouped.csv```
2. ```f1PitStopsData_Grouped.csv```
3. ```f1ForAnalysis.csv```
4. ```f1db-races.json```
5. ```f1db-drivers.json```
6. ```f1db-grands-prix.json```
7. ```f1db-races-race-results.json```

## Filtering
There are currently more than 30 ways to filter the F1 data which spans from 2015 to present. You can filter by one or all of the data fields on the left side of the page. The data dynamically updates and gives you a new total record count. 

## Linear regression
In addition to correlation coefficients, I have added several linear regressions to help predict the results of the next race. 

## Predictive Data Modeling
I used [sckit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) to perform machine learning by using data points to predict the race winner. ~~The model is in its infancy, and I am still trying to figure out the right data points to feed it.~~ I'm also currently trying to predict a driver's final place rather than their final time. That means that the [Mean Absolute Error](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/mean-absolute-error) relates to finisher placement which feels less exact than what I need. I'm using the XGBoost model. The predictive modeling is now under Advanced Options.

I have added [Monte Carlo](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/monte-carlo-simulation), [Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE)](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_selection.RFE.html), and [Boruta](https://www.jstatsoft.org/v36/i11/) feature selection to pair down the data fields. After significant refinement, I have a MAE down to 1.5 or less.


## Features used in data model

After going through a 1,000 test Monte Carlo simulation, these are the fields and descriptions of all of the features I used to achieve an MAE of 1.50 or below:

| Field Name                           | Description                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------- |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| practice_improvement                  | Change in practice position or time, indicating setup progress or adaptation.                 |
| practice_position_improvement_1P_3P   | Improvement in practice position from FP1 to FP3.                                             |
| driverDNFCount                       | Total number of times the driver did not finish (DNF) in their career.                        |
| CleanAirAvg_FP1                      | Driver's average lap time in clean air during FP1.                                            |
| constructor_recent_form_3_races      | Constructor's average finishing position over the last 3 races.                               |
| best_s1_sec                          | Driver's best sector 1 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| turns                                | Number of turns on the race circuit.                                                          |
| Delta_FP2                            | Change in lap time or position between FP1 and FP2.                                           |
| practice_time_improvement_2T_3T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP2 to FP3.                                             |
| practice_position_improvement_2P_3P  | Improvement in practice position from FP2 to FP3.                                             |
| podium_potential                     | Estimated likelihood of finishing on the podium, based on historical and recent data.         |
| totalStopTime                        | Total time spent in pit stops during the race.                                                |
| driverFastestPracticeLap_sec         | Driver's fastest lap time in any practice session.                                            |
| practice_time_improvement_time_time  | General improvement in practice lap times across sessions.                                    |
| track_experience                     | Number of times the driver has raced on this circuit.                                         |
| driverTotalChampionshipWins          | Total number of championship titles won by the driver.                                        |
| qualifying_consistency_std           | Standard deviation of qualifying positions, measuring consistency.                            |
| pit_stop_delta                       | Time difference between the driver's pit stops and the average pit stop time.                 |
| totalChampionshipPoints              | Total championship points scored by the driver.                                               |
| delta_from_race_avg                  | Difference between driver's lap time and the race average lap time.                           |
| average_humidity                     | Average humidity during the race.                                                             |
| driverDNFAvg                         | Average DNF rate for the driver (DNFs per race).                                              |
| SpeedI2_mph                          | Speed at a specific intermediate point (I2) in mph.                                           |
| qualPos_x_last_practicePos           | Interaction between qualifying position and last practice position.                           |
| averageStopTime                      | Average time spent per pit stop.                                                              |
| recent_vs_season                     | Comparison of recent performance to season average.                                           |
| race_pace_vs_median                  | Driver's race pace compared to the median pace of the field.                                  |
| recent_positions_gained_3_races      | Total positions gained over the last 3 races.                                                 |
| driver_dnf_rate_5_races              | Driver's DNF rate over the last 5 races.                                                      |
| driver_positionsGained_3_races       | Total positions gained by the driver over the last 3 races.                                   |
| constructorTotalRaceWins             | Total number of race wins by the constructor.                                                 |
| grid_x_avg_pit_time                  | Interaction between grid position and average pit stop time.                                  |
| driver_starting_position_5_races     | Driver's average starting position over the last 5 races.                                     |
| recent_form_ratio                    | Ratio of recent performance to historical performance.                                        |
| fp1_lap_delta_vs_best                | Difference between FP1 lap time and the best lap time.                                        |
| recent_form_x_qual                   | Interaction between recent form and qualifying position.                                      |
| driver_starting_position_3_races     | Driver's average starting position over the last 3 races.                                     |
| practice_improvement_x_qual          | Interaction between practice improvement and qualifying position.                             |
| grid_penalty_x_constructor           | Interaction between grid penalty and constructor.                                             |
| constructor_recent_form_5_races      | Constructor's average finishing position over the last 5 races.                               |
| driver_rank_x_constructor_rank       | Interaction between driver rank and constructor rank.                                         |
| qualPos_x_avg_practicePos            | Interaction between qualifying position and average practice position.                        |
| constructorTotalRaceStarts           | Total number of race starts by the constructor.                                               |
| historical_avgLapPace                | Driver's historical average lap pace.                                                         |
| grid_penalty                         | Grid penalty applied to the driver for the race.                                              |
| avg_final_position_per_track         | Driver's average final position at this track.                                                |
| best_qual_time                       | Driver's best qualifying lap time.                                                            |
| lastFPPositionNumber                 | Driver's position in the last free practice session.                                          |
| SpeedI1_mph                          | Speed at a specific intermediate point (I1) in mph.                                           |
| driver_positionsGained_5_races       | Total positions gained by the driver over the last 5 races.                                   |
| SafetyCarStatus                      | Indicator if a safety car was deployed in the race.                                           |
| recent_dnf_rate_3_races              | Driver's DNF rate over the last 3 races.                                                      |
| top_speed_rank                       | Driver's rank based on top speed in the race.                                                 |
| LapTime_sec                          | Driver's lap time in seconds.                                                                 |
| teammate_qual_delta                  | Difference in qualifying time between the driver and their teammate.                          |
| recent_form_median_3_races           | Median of driver's finishing positions over the last 3 races.                                 |
| average_wind_speed                   | Average wind speed during the race.                                                           |
| average_temp                         | Average temperature during the race.                                                          |
| Delta_FP3                            | Change in lap time or position between FP2 and FP3.                                           |
| best_s2_sec                          | Driver's best sector 2 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| CleanAirAvg_FP2                      | Driver's average lap time in clean air during FP2.                                            |
| constructor_form_ratio               | Ratio of constructor's recent performance to historical performance.                          |
| totalPolePositions                   | Total number of pole positions by the driver or constructor.                                  |
| qual_x_constructor_wins              | Interaction between qualifying position and constructor's total wins.                         |
| numberOfStops                        | Number of pit stops made by the driver in the race.                                           |
| teammate_practice_delta              | Difference in practice lap time between the driver and their teammate.                        |
| best_s3_sec                          | Driver's best sector 3 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| last_final_position_per_track_constructor | Constructor's last final position at this track.                                         |
| street_experience                    | Number of street races the driver has participated in.                                        |
| total_experience                     | Total number of races the driver has participated in.                                         |
| best_theory_lap_sec                  | Driver's best theoretical lap time (sum of best sector times).                                |
| Points                               | Points scored by the driver in the current season.                                            |
| recent_form_median_5_races           | Median of driver's finishing positions over the last 5 races.                                 |
| trackRace                            | Indicator if the race is on a permanent circuit.                                              |
| yearsActive                          | Number of years the driver has been active in F1.                                             |
| Delta_FP1                            | Change in lap time or position between FP1 and previous session.                              |
| SpeedST_mph                          | Speed at the speed trap in mph.                                                               |
| avg_final_position_per_track_constructor | Constructor's average final position at this track.                                      |
| recent_form_5_races                  | Driver's average finishing position over the last 5 races.                                    |
| grid_x_constructor_rank              | Interaction between grid position and constructor rank.                                       |
| driverAge                            | Age of the driver.                                                                            |
| streetRace                           | Indicator if the race is on a street circuit.                                                 |
| averagePracticePosition              | Driver's average position across all practice sessions.                                       |
| SpeedFL_mph                          | Speed on the fastest lap in mph.                                                              |
| recent_form_best_3_races             | Best finishing position by the driver in the last 3 races.                                    |
| BestConstructorPracticeLap_sec       | Constructor's best practice lap time.                                                         |
| qualifying_gap_to_pole               | Time gap between the driver and pole position in qualifying.                                  |
| driverTotalRaceStarts                | Total number of race starts by the driver.                                                    |
| practice_time_improvement_1T_3T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP1 to FP3.                                             |
| practice_time_improvement_1T_2T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP1 to FP2.                                             |
| constructor_avg_practice_position    | Constructor's average practice position.                                                      |
| qual_vs_track_avg                    | Driver's qualifying position compared to track average.                                       |
| practice_std_x_qual                  | Interaction between practice position standard deviation and qualifying position.              |
| pit_stop_rate                        | Rate of pit stops per race for the driver.                                                    |
| positions_gained_first_lap_pct       | Percentage of positions gained on the first lap.                                              |
| driver_podium_rate_3y                | Driver's podium rate over the last 3 years.                                                   |
| constructor_podium_ratio             | Constructor's podium rate (podiums per entry).                                                |
| driver_age_squared                   | Driver's age squared, capturing nonlinear age effects.                                        |
| constructor_recent_win_streak        | Number of wins by the constructor in the last 3 races.                                        |


## Other options
Besides filtering, you can also look at the upcoming race which shows historical and upcoming weather, the past winners, and data about the constructors. You can view the entire current season with details about each file. You can look at the raw, unfiltered data. Finally, you can view a correlation for the entire dataset.

## Weather
The weather is pulled from [Open-Meteo's free API](https://open-meteo.com/) which allows you to search historical weather data by hour going back to the 1940s. The hourly reports are pulled per race and then averaged to show a daily weather report on race day.

### To do
- Figure out a way to reset the filters.
- ~~Incorporate the linear regression equations for predictive race results.~~

Commit message:

Update readme with table of contents

README.md, after:

# Formula 1 Data Analysis
Analysis of Formula 1 ```.json``` files based on the very generous data files from [F1DB](https://github.com/f1db/f1db) for the vast majority of the analysis. F1DB did not have race control messages which include Safety Cars and flags. For that data, I used [FastF1](https://docs.fastf1.dev/). Full data analysis is available through the [Formula 1 Analysis - Streamlit app](https://f1analysis-app.streamlit.app/).

## Table of Contents
- [File organization](#file-organization)
- [Filtering](#filtering)
- [Linear regression](#linear-regression)
- [Predictive Data Modeling](#predictive-data-modeling)
- [Features used in data model](#features-used-in-data-model)
- [Other options](#other-options)
- [Weather](#weather)
- [To do](#to-do)

## File organization
There are two python files involved in this app: ```raceAnalysis.py``` and ```f1-generate-analysis.py```, though there are other python files which generate content. The Race Analysis file is what runs the Streamlit code and displays the data, filters, charts, etc. Before that file is run, you need to run the Generate Analysis page. This creates a bunch of dataframes, and it creates several .csv files for easier retrievel during the Streamlit display. This is done so fewer calculations are required in the Streamlit app which should improve performance. However, it does require that you run the ```f1-generate-analysis.py``` before you run the Steamlit.

The CSV files and any associated .json files are included in the ```data_files``` directory. The ```.json``` files come from [F1DB](https://github.com/f1db/f1db). The following files are generated and then copied into the ```data_files``` directory:

1. ```f1WeatherData_Grouped.csv```
2. ```f1PitStopsData_Grouped.csv```
3. ```f1ForAnalysis.csv```
4. ```f1db-races.json```
5. ```f1db-drivers.json```
6. ```f1db-grands-prix.json```
7. ```f1db-races-race-results.json```

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Filtering
There are currently more than 30 ways to filter the F1 data which spans from 2015 to present. You can filter by one or all of the data fields on the left side of the page. The data dynamically updates and gives you a new total record count.

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Linear regression
In addition to correlation coefficients, I have added several linear regressions to help predict the results of the next race.

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Predictive Data Modeling
I used [sckit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) to perform machine learning by using data points to predict the race winner. ~~The model is in its infancy, and I am still trying to figure out the right data points to feed it.~~ I'm also currently trying to predict a driver's final place rather than their final time. That means that the [Mean Absolute Error](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/mean-absolute-error) relates to finisher placement which feels less exact than what I need. I'm using the XGBoost model. The predictive modeling is now under Advanced Options.

I have added [Monte Carlo](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/monte-carlo-simulation), [Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE)](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_selection.RFE.html), and [Boruta](https://www.jstatsoft.org/v36/i11/) feature selection to pair down the data fields. After significant refinement, I have a MAE down to 1.5 or less.

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Features used in data model

After going through a 1,000 test Monte Carlo simulation, these are the fields and descriptions of all of the features I used to achieve an MAE of 1.50 or below:

| Field Name                           | Description                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------- |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| practice_improvement                  | Change in practice position or time, indicating setup progress or adaptation.                 |
| practice_position_improvement_1P_3P   | Improvement in practice position from FP1 to FP3.                                             |
| driverDNFCount                       | Total number of times the driver did not finish (DNF) in their career.                        |
| CleanAirAvg_FP1                      | Driver's average lap time in clean air during FP1.                                            |
| constructor_recent_form_3_races      | Constructor's average finishing position over the last 3 races.                               |
| best_s1_sec                          | Driver's best sector 1 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| turns                                | Number of turns on the race circuit.                                                          |
| Delta_FP2                            | Change in lap time or position between FP1 and FP2.                                           |
| practice_time_improvement_2T_3T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP2 to FP3.                                             |
| practice_position_improvement_2P_3P  | Improvement in practice position from FP2 to FP3.                                             |
| podium_potential                     | Estimated likelihood of finishing on the podium, based on historical and recent data.         |
| totalStopTime                        | Total time spent in pit stops during the race.                                                |
| driverFastestPracticeLap_sec         | Driver's fastest lap time in any practice session.                                            |
| practice_time_improvement_time_time  | General improvement in practice lap times across sessions.                                    |
| track_experience                     | Number of times the driver has raced on this circuit.                                         |
| driverTotalChampionshipWins          | Total number of championship titles won by the driver.                                        |
| qualifying_consistency_std           | Standard deviation of qualifying positions, measuring consistency.                            |
| pit_stop_delta                       | Time difference between the driver's pit stops and the average pit stop time.                 |
| totalChampionshipPoints              | Total championship points scored by the driver.                                               |
| delta_from_race_avg                  | Difference between driver's lap time and the race average lap time.                           |
| average_humidity                     | Average humidity during the race.                                                             |
| driverDNFAvg                         | Average DNF rate for the driver (DNFs per race).                                              |
| SpeedI2_mph                          | Speed at a specific intermediate point (I2) in mph.                                           |
| qualPos_x_last_practicePos           | Interaction between qualifying position and last practice position.                           |
| averageStopTime                      | Average time spent per pit stop.                                                              |
| recent_vs_season                     | Comparison of recent performance to season average.                                           |
| race_pace_vs_median                  | Driver's race pace compared to the median pace of the field.                                  |
| recent_positions_gained_3_races      | Total positions gained over the last 3 races.                                                 |
| driver_dnf_rate_5_races              | Driver's DNF rate over the last 5 races.                                                      |
| driver_positionsGained_3_races       | Total positions gained by the driver over the last 3 races.                                   |
| constructorTotalRaceWins             | Total number of race wins by the constructor.                                                 |
| grid_x_avg_pit_time                  | Interaction between grid position and average pit stop time.                                  |
| driver_starting_position_5_races     | Driver's average starting position over the last 5 races.                                     |
| recent_form_ratio                    | Ratio of recent performance to historical performance.                                        |
| fp1_lap_delta_vs_best                | Difference between FP1 lap time and the best lap time.                                        |
| recent_form_x_qual                   | Interaction between recent form and qualifying position.                                      |
| driver_starting_position_3_races     | Driver's average starting position over the last 3 races.                                     |
| practice_improvement_x_qual          | Interaction between practice improvement and qualifying position.                             |
| grid_penalty_x_constructor           | Interaction between grid penalty and constructor.                                             |
| constructor_recent_form_5_races      | Constructor's average finishing position over the last 5 races.                               |
| driver_rank_x_constructor_rank       | Interaction between driver rank and constructor rank.                                         |
| qualPos_x_avg_practicePos            | Interaction between qualifying position and average practice position.                        |
| constructorTotalRaceStarts           | Total number of race starts by the constructor.                                               |
| historical_avgLapPace                | Driver's historical average lap pace.                                                         |
| grid_penalty                         | Grid penalty applied to the driver for the race.                                              |
| avg_final_position_per_track         | Driver's average final position at this track.                                                |
| best_qual_time                       | Driver's best qualifying lap time.                                                            |
| lastFPPositionNumber                 | Driver's position in the last free practice session.                                          |
| SpeedI1_mph                          | Speed at a specific intermediate point (I1) in mph.                                           |
| driver_positionsGained_5_races       | Total positions gained by the driver over the last 5 races.                                   |
| SafetyCarStatus                      | Indicator if a safety car was deployed in the race.                                           |
| recent_dnf_rate_3_races              | Driver's DNF rate over the last 3 races.                                                      |
| top_speed_rank                       | Driver's rank based on top speed in the race.                                                 |
| LapTime_sec                          | Driver's lap time in seconds.                                                                 |
| teammate_qual_delta                  | Difference in qualifying time between the driver and their teammate.                          |
| recent_form_median_3_races           | Median of driver's finishing positions over the last 3 races.                                 |
| average_wind_speed                   | Average wind speed during the race.                                                           |
| average_temp                         | Average temperature during the race.                                                          |
| Delta_FP3                            | Change in lap time or position between FP2 and FP3.                                           |
| best_s2_sec                          | Driver's best sector 2 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| CleanAirAvg_FP2                      | Driver's average lap time in clean air during FP2.                                            |
| constructor_form_ratio               | Ratio of constructor's recent performance to historical performance.                          |
| totalPolePositions                   | Total number of pole positions by the driver or constructor.                                  |
| qual_x_constructor_wins              | Interaction between qualifying position and constructor's total wins.                         |
| numberOfStops                        | Number of pit stops made by the driver in the race.                                           |
| teammate_practice_delta              | Difference in practice lap time between the driver and their teammate.                        |
| best_s3_sec                          | Driver's best sector 3 time in qualifying or practice.                                        |
| last_final_position_per_track_constructor | Constructor's last final position at this track.                                         |
| street_experience                    | Number of street races the driver has participated in.                                        |
| total_experience                     | Total number of races the driver has participated in.                                         |
| best_theory_lap_sec                  | Driver's best theoretical lap time (sum of best sector times).                                |
| Points                               | Points scored by the driver in the current season.                                            |
| recent_form_median_5_races           | Median of driver's finishing positions over the last 5 races.                                 |
| trackRace                            | Indicator if the race is on a permanent circuit.                                              |
| yearsActive                          | Number of years the driver has been active in F1.                                             |
| Delta_FP1                            | Change in lap time or position between FP1 and previous session.                              |
| SpeedST_mph                          | Speed at the speed trap in mph.                                                               |
| avg_final_position_per_track_constructor | Constructor's average final position at this track.                                      |
| recent_form_5_races                  | Driver's average finishing position over the last 5 races.                                    |
| grid_x_constructor_rank              | Interaction between grid position and constructor rank.                                       |
| driverAge                            | Age of the driver.                                                                            |
| streetRace                           | Indicator if the race is on a street circuit.                                                 |
| averagePracticePosition              | Driver's average position across all practice sessions.                                       |
| SpeedFL_mph                          | Speed on the fastest lap in mph.                                                              |
| recent_form_best_3_races             | Best finishing position by the driver in the last 3 races.                                    |
| BestConstructorPracticeLap_sec       | Constructor's best practice lap time.                                                         |
| qualifying_gap_to_pole               | Time gap between the driver and pole position in qualifying.                                  |
| driverTotalRaceStarts                | Total number of race starts by the driver.                                                    |
| practice_time_improvement_1T_3T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP1 to FP3.                                             |
| practice_time_improvement_1T_2T      | Improvement in practice lap time from FP1 to FP2.                                             |
| constructor_avg_practice_position    | Constructor's average practice position.                                                      |
| qual_vs_track_avg                    | Driver's qualifying position compared to track average.                                       |
| practice_std_x_qual                  | Interaction between practice position standard deviation and qualifying position.              |
| pit_stop_rate                        | Rate of pit stops per race for the driver.                                                    |
| positions_gained_first_lap_pct       | Percentage of positions gained on the first lap.                                              |
| driver_podium_rate_3y                | Driver's podium rate over the last 3 years.                                                   |
| constructor_podium_ratio             | Constructor's podium rate (podiums per entry).                                                |
| driver_age_squared                   | Driver's age squared, capturing nonlinear age effects.                                        |
| constructor_recent_win_streak        | Number of wins by the constructor in the last 3 races.                                        |

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Other options
Besides filtering, you can also look at the upcoming race which shows historical and upcoming weather, the past winners, and data about the constructors. You can view the entire current season with details about each file. You can look at the raw, unfiltered data. Finally, you can view a correlation for the entire dataset.

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## Weather
The weather is pulled from [Open-Meteo's free API](https://open-meteo.com/) which allows you to search historical weather data by hour going back to the 1940s. The hourly reports are pulled per race and then averaged to show a daily weather report on race day.

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)

## To do
- Figure out a way to reset the filters.
- ~~Incorporate the linear regression equations for predictive race results.~~

[↑ Back to top](#table-of-contents)
